React Revamp: Add Component Lifecycle Methods lesson (#24842)
TheOdinProject/curriculum: react/class_components/component_lifecycle_methods.md

### Introduction

> In the previous section, you've dealt with the component lifecycle through the useEffect function. This is how you've run code based on a components lifecycle stage so far, but in class components we have to use specific lifecycle methods instead.

Reviewer: Wording suggestion:

```suggestion
In the previous section, you've learned about a component's lifecycle. In functional components, we've primarily used the `useEffect` hook to take perform tasks throughout the lifecycle, but in class components we have to use specific lifecycle methods instead.
```

Author: Looks good to me, is the take before perform a typo? Can't make sense of it in my head.

> We'll start with a short recap of what a components lifecycle is. There are three stages to a components life, mounting, updating and unmounting. Each of these have a method assigned to them within class components, which is what we are going to cover in this lesson.

Reviewer: Punctuation suggestion:

```suggestion
We'll start with a short recap of what a components lifecycle is. There are three stages to a components life: mounting, updating, and unmounting. Each of these have a method assigned to them within class components, which is what we are going to cover in this lesson.
```

### Lesson Overview

This section contains a general overview of topics that you will learn in this lesson.

> *   What the different lifecycle methods are.
> *   How we can use these lifecycle methods in our app.

Reviewer: We can have one LO here:

```suggestion
*   How to use lifecycle methods in a class component
```

### ComponentDidUpdate

This method is run after a component re-renders. Because of this, you have to be careful about what you update in this method, as if you're updating state indiscriminately, a re-render is caused, and you'll end up in an endless loop. You can avoid this issue by using conditional statements about the equality of previous and current props when updating state.

In this method you should be updating anything that needs to be changed in response to either the DOM changing, or any states that you might want to act on upon change. For example, you'd want to refetch user data if the user changes.

### ComponentWillUnmount

This is the last lifecycle method, which is called before a component is unmounted and destroyed. In this method you should be performing cleanup actions, so that would be cancelling network requests, clearing timers, etc.

### Assignment

<div class="lesson-content__panel" markdown="1">

> 1.  Check out this [lifecycle diagram](https://projects.wojtekmaj.pl/react-lifecycle-methods-diagram/) to see a good visual representation of a components lifecycle methods.

Reviewer: Love this resource!

### Introduction

In the previous section, you've learned about a component's lifecycle. In functional components, we've primarily used the `useEffect` hook to perform tasks throughout the lifecycle, but in class components we have to use specific lifecycle methods instead.

> We'll start with a short recap of what a components lifecycle is. There are three stages to a components life: mounting, updating, and unmounting. Each of these have a method assigned to them within class components, which is what we are going to cover in this lesson.

Reviewer: Possible punctuation error:

```suggestion
We'll start with a short recap of what a components lifecycle is. There are three stages to a component's life: mounting, updating, and unmounting. Each of these have a method assigned to them within class components, which is what we are going to cover in this lesson.
```

### componentDidMount()

This method is run after the component is mounted (inserted in the DOM tree). You should make any calls to fetch data that is needed for the component here. It is also a good place to do anything that is reliant on the component, such as drawing on a canvas element that you just rendered.

### componentDidUpdate()

This method is run after a component re-renders. Because of this, you have to be careful about what you update in this method, as if you're updating state indiscriminately, a re-render is caused, and you'll end up in an endless loop. You can avoid this issue by using conditional statements about the equality of previous and current props when updating state.

In this method you should be updating anything that needs to be changed in response to either the DOM changing, or any states that you might want to act on upon change. For example, you'd want to refetch user data if the user changes.

### componentWillUnmount()

This is the last lifecycle method, which is called before a component is unmounted and destroyed. In this method you should be performing cleanup actions, so that would be cancelling network requests, clearing timers, etc.

> ### useEffect()

Reviewer: The `useEffect()` heading might come off as misleading or might be misinterpreted as a lifecycle method. We could go for a "How useEffect() Combines the Lifecycle Methods" heading or similar.

> Now that we've learnt about class lifecycle methods, it's useful to understand that the `useEffect` hook used in functional components is essentially a combination of componentDidMount, componentDidUpdate, and componentWillUnmount. Which method/methods it relates to varies based on it's dependency array, and if it returns anything.

Reviewer: Syntax highlighting on the lifecycle method names would be great.

*   An empty dependency array would be equivalent to `componentDidMount`.

> *   A dependency array with a value/values in it would be similar to `componentDidUpdate`, but only ran when the dependency provided changes.

Reviewer: Wording suggestion:

```suggestion
*   A dependency array with a value/values in it would be similar to `componentDidUpdate`, but only runs when the dependencies change.
```

*   No dependency array would be equivalent to `componentDidMount` and `componentDidUpdate` combined.
*   A return function inside of a `useEffect()` hook would be equivalent to `componentWillUnmount`.

For example:

~~~js
    useEffect(() => {
        placeholderFunction()

>         return () => clearUpFunction()

Reviewer: Can we call it a `cleanupFunction` instead of `clearUpFunction`? I've seen the term `cleanup` used more often. I'm not tied to this suggestion; I'll leave the decision to you.

```suggestion
        return () => cleanupFunction()
```

Author: Yeah that sounds like a good change, I typically use the term cleanup more often too, not sure why I opted for clearup here.

### Assignment

<div class="lesson-content__panel" markdown="1">

1.  Check out this [lifecycle diagram](https://projects.wojtekmaj.pl/react-lifecycle-methods-diagram/) to see a good visual representation of a components lifecycle methods.

2. Read this [component lifecycle documentation](https://reactjs.org/docs/react-component.html#the-component-lifecycle) by the people who made react!
    *   You only have to worry about the methods in bold, but you can read up on the others if you're curious - they're uncommon and you likely won't need them in 
        most of your apps. 
</div>

### Knowledge Check

This section contains questions for you to check your understanding of this lesson on your own. If you’re having trouble answering a question, click it and review the material it links to.

*   <a class="knowledge-check-link" href="#render">What is the only required lifecycle method?</a>
*   <a class="knowledge-check-link" href="#componentdidmount">What lifecycle method should you use for initial data fetching?</a>
*   <a class="knowledge-check-link" href="#componentdidupdate">When you want to act upon change of the DOM, or of state, what lifecycle method would you use?</a>

> *   <a class="knowledge-check-link" href="#componentwillunmount">When performing cleanup actions, what lifecycle method should be used?</a>

Reviewer: We can add a knowledge check for the useEffect section. Something like, "How the useEffect hook combines some of the lifecycle methods?"

In this method you should be updating anything that needs to be changed in response to either the DOM changing, or any states that you might want to act on upon change. For example, you'd want to refetch user data if the user changes.

### componentWillUnmount()

This is the last lifecycle method, which is called before a component is unmounted and destroyed. In this method you should be performing cleanup actions, so that would be cancelling network requests, clearing timers, etc.

### How useEffect() combines the Lifecycle Methods

Now that we've learnt about class lifecycle methods, it's useful to understand that the `useEffect` hook used in functional components is essentially a combination of `componentDidMount`, `componentDidUpdate`, and `componentWillUnmount`. Which method/methods it relates to varies based on it's dependency array, and if it returns anything.

*   An empty dependency array would be equivalent to `componentDidMount`.

> *   A dependency array with a value/values in it would be similar to `componentDidUpdate`, but only runs when the dependencies change.

Reviewer: >  A dependency array with a value/values in it would be similar to `componentDidUpdate`, but only runs when the dependencies change.

Snouldn't this also run `componentDidMount`?

*   No dependency array would be equivalent to `componentDidMount` and `componentDidUpdate` combined.
*   A return function inside of a `useEffect()` hook would be equivalent to `componentWillUnmount`.

For example:

~~~js
    useEffect(() => {
        placeholderFunction()
        return () => cleanupFunction()
    }, [])
~~~

> In this snippet, the useEffect contains the functionality of `componentDidMount`, and `componentWillUnmount` via the return function.

Reviewer: We can also what the empty dependency array means in this example.

```suggestion
In this snippet, the useEffect contains the functionality of `componentDidMount`, and `componentWillUnmount` via the return function. This example doesn't have the `componentDidUpdate` functionality because of an empty dependency array.
```
